---
title: Where did you go? 2
date: 2012-09-22
---

I haven't posted on this blog or <a
href="http://abagofapples.com/abagofapples">my other one</a> in a long
time.  So, is it destined for the looming scrap pile of the Internet's
abandoned one-shot blogs.  I hope not!

So where have I been?  With college, I'm quite busy as is.  On top of
that, I'm working on a little ambitious project of my own.

## TouhouS

Due to certain events last year, I decided to make a free open-source
version of Touhou, that legendary factory of culture and a good portion
of still-circulating memes.  I'd be surprised if anyone who reads this
doesn't know of Touhou, but a quick Google search should enlighten you
to how big a world you've been missing out on.

I've been working on it little by little in my spare time.  My grand
vision is to complete it myself (to pay homage to ZUN), maintain a high
level of code quality and make it extensible and scriptable so that
anyone with some programming experience can easily make new Touhou
levels or even entire Touhou games or other shoot-em-up games with the
engine.

For the more technical: the source code can be found at its most current
on Github <a href="https://github.com/darkfeline/TouhouS">here</a>.  The
current develop branch is NOT stable; I'm currently in the process of
adapting my code to a component-based implementation.  The current
master(stable) branch should work if I remember correctly (it's been a
while), and you can play a little demo of what I have so far.  You'll
need python 3 and pyglet for python 3 (either from the mercury
repository or the 1.2alpha).
