---
title: Summer 2011 Anime Thoughts and Impressions
date: 2011-11-03
---

I've decided to share my thoughts and impressions on the recent summer
2011 season anime all at once, since it's easier than writing a separate
article for each, mainly because I don't really have enough to say about
some of them to merit writing multiple articles and I'm lazy.  Before
that, however, I'd like to introduce (a slice of) my trusty anime
spreadsheet!  Because I've watched so much anime, I need to keep a list
of everything I watched and up to what point—yes, there's that many and
yes, my memory is that bad.  You can see some other convenient
information I keep in my list, such as the total number of episodes,
whether I've finished a series, what type the anime is (usually blank,
but I use it for, say OVAs and movies), what day it airs (too lazy to
add), what season it broadcast, and my partially objective score for it,
from one to ten.  The average rating so far is 7.775, which I think
indicates that I am neither particularly forgiving nor overly harsh,
though personally I think I am too nice to many series.  Anyway, let's
see what Summer 2011 had to offer!  (Disclaimer: What follows is my
opinion and thus will be considered absolute truth unless challenged
with supported arguments.  Such arguments are warmly welcome.)

<h3>Interesting</h3>

<ul>
  <li>Mawaru Penguindrum</li>
  <li>Dantalian no Shoka (alternatively, Dantalion no Shoka, The Mystic Archives of
    Dantalian, Bibliotheca Mystica de Dantalian)</li>
  <li>Usagi Drop (Bunny Drop, ウサギドロップ)</li>
  <li>Kami-sama no Memo-chou (God's Notebook, 神様のメモ帳)</li>
  <li>No. 6</li>
  <li>Steins;Gate</li>
</ul>

<h3>Passable</h3>
<ul>
  <li>La Croisée dans un Labyrinthe Étranger (Ikoku
    Meiro no Croisée, 異国迷路のクロワーゼ, A Stroll Through a Foreign
    Labyrinth)</li>
  <li>Nurarihyon no Mago II (Nurarihyon's Grandson 2)</li>
  <li>Mayo Chiki! (まよちき！, Mayoeru Shitsuji to Chicken na Ore to)</li>
  <li>Nichijou(日常, Daily Life)</li>
</ul>

First, let us get all of the simple stuff out of the way before getting
to the interesting shows.  Ikoku Meiro no Croisée is about a little
Japanese girl dropped into 19th century France, when Japan began to open
up to the world.  It explores culture shock, many different facets of
French and Japanese culture, and about how the girl, Yune, and her
caretaker, Claude, deal with their cultural differences.  The art and
scenery is quite splendid and the story pleasing, though it leans toward
slice-of-life.

Nurarihyon no Mago II is the second season (obviously) of the anime
adaptation of the manga.  It is a good shounen series, with all the
tropes that brings along with it.  The youkai, Japanese mythological
setting of Nurarihyon no Mago is slightly more fresh than the standard
boy-out-to-save-the-world setting, and the show is fun to watch, though
there's not much originality or depth.

Mayo Chiki! is one of the many standard high school male with female
harem series running around lately.  Its unique premise is that the
protagonist suffers from a rare form of gynophobia that makes his nose
bleed when he comes into contact with girls.  One day the protagonist
discovers that the school's popular girl's popular butler is in fact a
girl, and all hell breaks loose, in a manner of speaking.  Mayo Chiki!
is enjoyable to watch, though with standard character archetypes, humor
setups, aesops, and so on.

Nichijou is the odd one of the bunch; I would have personally placed it
under the "Interesting" heading, but I refrained due to its sheer
audacious use of obscure, almost non sequitur humor.  It is hilarious,
random, and crazy.

## <i>Mawaru Penguindrum</i>

As <i>Mawaru Penguindrum</i> hasn't finished airing yet, I'll leave its
review until later.

## <i>Dantalian no Shoka</i>

<i>Dantalian no Shoka</i> is the spiritual successor to last season's
(was it last season? my memory is woefully inadequate) <i>Gosick</i> For
<i>Gosick</i>'s Kujo and his knuckleduster, we are given Huey with his
revolver, for Victorique and her mysteries, we are given Dalian with her
Phantom Books.  Being an almost trope-for-trope copy of <i>Gosick</i>,
it certainly doesn't win any points for originality, though it preserves
most of the attraction of its source material.  <i>Dantalian</i> also
has quite a few flaws in pacing, plot holes (in particular, Huey's
relationship with the Bibliotheca is incompletely explained only very
late in the anime, leaving the viewer puzzled over the many cuts where a
young Huey befriends the girl in the Bibliotheca), what I particularly
appreciate about <i>Dantalian</i> it its rampant use of symbolic names
and its over-arching theme of "forbidden knowledge".  This can be seen
in the title and eponymous library—Dantalian is the 71th demon in the
Ars Goetia, the demon of all knowledge, arts and sciences, and of all
similitudes, a fitting title for a library of forbidden knowledge— and
in puns and mythological references of many of the Phantom Books.

<i>Dantalian</i> also briefly explores different views of forbidden
knowledge as well; while Huey and Dalian seal most of the Books they com
across, they have also destroyed a few, while Libricide officers
specifically burn them, as the Church burned heretic texts in the Middle
Ages (fire, after all, is the universal purifier), whilst Dalian's
counterpart, the Bibliotheca Mystica de Raziel—named after the archangel
Raziel, keeper of secrets—instead fosters the creation of Phantom Books,
of forbidden knowledge.  Altogether, this makes <i>Dantalian no
  Shoka</i> an interesting watch, though you'll have to pay attention to
catch all the references.

## <i>Usagi Drop</i>

<i>Usagi Drop</i> is rather unique, even by anime standards.  While
anime tends to explore a wider range of subjects and issues than other
media (especially Western media), a single man raising an adopted girl
and their mutual growth is not a recurring theme (to my knowledge) in
any medium.  That is essentially what <i>Usagi Drop</i> is about: a
single man, Daikichi Kawachi, at his late grandfather's funeral meets a
girl who turns out to be his grandfather's illegitimate daughter.  After
a long dispute between the family about the girl's future (which also
serves as criticism of Japan's cultural inclination toward passivity),
Daikichi decides to raise the girl, Daikichi Rin, himself, wondering how
hard it could be.

As he finds out, raising a child is extremely difficult,  Over time, he
worries about many different issues of raising a child as a single
adult, such as finding day care, buying clothes for a girl (after all,
Daikichi never really understood women or children; Rin is just about
his least compatible match), and countless other experiences.  Among the
many questions Daikichi wonders about, one of is a central theme for the
series: are the sacrifices made raising a child worth it?  Throughout
the anime, from the very beginning, where Daikichi's mother chides him
for his rashness with, "Raising a child is hard work, you know." to the
hopeful ending, Daikichi experiences firsthand the sacrifices a child
demands, yet he also realizes that what he gives up cannot really be
called sacrifices either.  The joy of seeing Rin's smile and all the
memories of their time together are not things for which sacrifices are
made; rather, they are things in which time and effort are invested to
nurture to bloom.

## <i>Kami-sama no Memo-chou</i>

Structure-wise, <i>Kami-sama no Memo-chou</i> is fairly standard, with
an arc-based structure where a certain conflict is resolved over a
number of episodes, and after everything is resolved, another arc
begins, with maybe some hinting at the end of the previous arc and a
"culminating" arc to wrap up something hinted at throughout the series.
The music, the art, and the characters are all well done, that is to
say, average (harsh, I know).  What intrigued me enough to list this
anime here is simply one thing: the "human element" which
<i>Kami-sama</i> emphasizes through its conflicts and its characters.
I'll do a quick run-down of examples here, as this article is getting
quite long at this point: Alice and the NEET detectives, as, in Alice's
words, only two kinds of people can do something for the dead,
detectives and writers; Ayaka, her brother, and Angel Fix, all revolving
around the symbol of wings, as in human freedom; Narumi and his
emotional (some might say foolish and naïve) behavior and ideas; and all
of the various problems Alice takes on are ultimately human, emotional
problems.

## <i>No. 6</i>

If anything, <i>No. 6</i> is the anime version of George Orwell's
<i>1984</i>.  The beautiful and clean, technologically advanced No. 6 is
a superficial utopia which is belied by the omniscient devices citizens
wear on their wrists, the ranking by intelligence which assigns citizens
to their lot in life, and the disturbing pledge of loyalty government
employees make to the city.  The dystopian world can be seen more
clearly in the world outside of the city, which is filled with ruins and
people fighting to survive; No. 6 dumps its trash outside to keep itself
clean.  In a way, this is a metaphor for the world as it is now;
developed countries exploit third-world countries to maintain their
appearance, at the cost of the rest of the world.  The character dynamic
is also very interesting, with the hopeful and naïve Shion and the
rational, cynical Nezumi serving as foils for one another.  They also
instill themselves in the other as well, as Nezumi grows to care for
Shion despite himself, and Shion losing himself in a spirit of
calculated vengeance when he sees Nezumi hurt.

Other parts of <i>No. 6</i> are less noteworthy.  The art and music are
average, and the symbolism in Safu, the elves, the elder in the cave,
and the bees I suspect may be very deep, but as of yet I haven't put in
the time to pick them apart and thus they seem rather contrived at the
moment.  However, I think the beauty of <i>No. 6</i> is that, between
the city and the outside, it describes the world, and between Shion and
Nezumi, it describes humankind.

## <i>Steins;Gate</i>

Ah, and now we come to this one; what can I say?  A deconstruction well
done, it trails behind only <i>Madoka</i> currently in my mind.  The
characters, the music, the plot, the message, even the title are all
praiseworthy.  Starting with the characters, they are all unique and
interesting.  Eschewing standard anime archetypes, we have the
schizophrenic, paranoid, yet also flamboyant Okabe; the tsundere genius
scientist, who actually acts like a genius scientist, Kurisu; the slight
airhead, cheerful Mayuri, with her signature "doo-do-doo"; the fat
computer nerd Daru; &c, all of them unique, all of them badass in their
own way.  All of the opening and closing themes perfectly match the
mysterious, sci-fi mood of the series.  The plot goes from confusing and
relatively bright to its dark, deconstructive mood in the second half,
deconstructing time travel and fate with glee.  The obvious message is
"Don't mess with time", but it also shows the pain and suffering time
travel can cause, and how it drives Okabe to near-insanity.  It also
demonstrates memory and its importance to who we are, how we see others,
and how significant it is to us humans.  Finally, even the title hints
at what prospective viewers of the anime can expect: like its
predecessor, <i>Chaos;Gate</i>, <i>Steins;Gate</i> uses the semi-colon
as its separator, even eschewing the more common colon or period as a
separator which eschews the standard space.  Like the oft-neglected
semicolon in English, the title tells us that the anime will be using
the same base techniques as other anime, but to present a more detailed
message.

## Conclusion

Phew, that was a lot to write, even just briefly touching on only a
handful of the anime for Summer 2011.  I hope I encouraged some of you
to try out some of the anime I suggested here, and perhaps helped you to
see them, if you have already seen them, in a new light.  I'll be giving
my thoughts on the next season as well; please look forward to it.
