---
title: 2015 winter anime impressions part 2
date: 2015-02-02
publishdate: 2015-02-02
subjects:
  - "anime"
contents:
  - review
---

Continuing from [part 1].

[part 1]: {{< ref "2015-winter-anime-impressions.md" >}}

## <i>Binan Koukou Chikyuu Bouei-bu Love!</i>

This show is gay, as in "contains characters and event that are suggestive of
male homosexuality".  It's not as blatant as, say, <i>Free!</i>, but it's
certainly up there.  It falls somewhere in between shows like <i>Daily Lives of
High School Boys</i> and <i>Kimi to Boku.</i>, which only feel gay if one is
extremely homophobic, and shows like <i>Free!</i>, which are blatantly gay.

In other words, it's not exactly my type of show, but I watched a fair bit of
it because it seemed interesting.  The premise is that a group of high school
students are recruited by an alien wombat to protect the planet against another
group of high school students recruited by an alien porcupine.  However, even a
handful of episodes into the show it maintains a dull villain-of-the-week
rhythm which bores quickly.

## <i>Yurikuma Arashi</i>

If <i>Binan</i> is blatantly gay, then <i>Yurikuma Arashi</i> is blatantly
lesbian.  But while <i>Binan</i> is episodic doldrums, <i>Yurikuma</i> is a
crazy roller coaster of symbolism and love.  Directed by Kunihiko Ikuhara, who
is known for (among others) <i>Revolutionary Girl Utena</i> and <i>Mawaru
Penguindrum</i>, the story unfolds slowly as the show progresses, but nothing
is quite clear at first.

In this world, bears began to attack humans after the remains of the planet
Kumaria fell from the sky.  The humans erected the Wall of Severance to keep
out the bears.  It is futile however, as bears infiltrate human society,
disguised as humans.  One bear, Ginko Yurishiro, crosses the Wall to pursue her
love for a human, Kureha Tsubaki, accompanied by another bear, Lulu Yurigasaki,
who is devoted to Ginko.  This odd trio finds themselves facing the mysterious
Invisible Storm, who reject and punish those who refuse to become "invisible",
and the challenge issued by the Wall of Severance: "Will you give up on love?
or..."

## <i>Kantai Collection: KanColle</i>

This show is a love letter to KanColle fans.  It falls into the general
category of "military slice of life", such as <i>Sora no Woto</i>, <i>Strike
Witches</i>, or <i>K-On!</i>: there is some plot moving toward a conclusion,
such as a war, that progresses in spurts occasionally, but the gaps in between
are filled with slice-of-life antics and character and world development.
Here, there is an ongoing war against the Abyssals, however much of the show
focuses on the Ship Girl characters.

The girls are cute, and the episodes are sufficiently interesting, but
otherwise the show isn't particularly notable, except that, like the KanColle
game itself, the anime provides a great opportunity for tangential learning.

## <i>Shigatsu wa Kimi no Uso</i>

A (melo)dramatic musical romance.  To summarize succinctly, this show explores
the emotional journeys of its characters through music.  At the center lies a
lost pianist who grew up under the abusive instruction of his late mother, and
a bright violinist dying to express herself.

Not a breakthrough innovative drama by any means, but very well written
otherwise, and the art and music (of course) is excellent.

## <i>Garo: Honoo no Kokuin</i>

This show is an anime spin-off of the GARO tokusatsu TV series.  I don't watch
tokusatsu shows, but think <i>Kamen Rider</i> and you won't be far off.

Without spoiling anything, the show itself is quite good.  Thematically,
<i>Garo</i> is very dark.  It is driven by its strong plot, characters, and
world (so, everything, basically).

## <i>Saenai Heroine no Sodatekata</i>

A standard high school harem show that feels somewhat like <i>Oregairu</i>[^1].
This one actually has a plot, despite not being a VN adaptation: the main cast
is working on a VN of their own, at the behest of the otaku male lead.  It
contains self-referential humor, as one would expect.

[^1]: <i>Yahari Ore no Seishun Love Comedy wa Machigatteiru.</i>

## <i>Ansatsu Kyoushitsu</i>

On the surface, <i>Ansatsu Kyoushitsu</i> has a wacky premise.  A man-made
living weapon (who is later named Koro-sensei) escapes and destroys most of the
moon in one shot.  The creature effortlessly evades all attempts to kill it,
and issues an ultimatum that it be allowed to teach a class of delinquent
students, who will have the chance to kill it before it destroys the planet in
a year.

However, the real focus of the show is on the students and how they grow under
the tutelage of a caring teacher, having been abandoned by the rest of their
school and society.

## <i>Death Parade</i>

This is a full anime adaptation of one of the Young Animator projects, <i>Death
Billiards</i>.  It's decent, but doesn't particularly stand out in any way.
The concept, where pairs of people who have died are judged through a game to
determine their destination, works well as a one-shot, but why this got a full
anime and not, say, <i>Little Witch Academia</i> is a mystery.

## <i>Cross Ange</i>

A grand mecha show which seems to be following in <i>Guilty Crown</i> and
<i>Valvrave</i>'s footsteps as a "so bad it's good" kind of show.  However,
<i>Cross Ange</i> is actually good, surprisingly.  It focuses primarily on the
development of the female lead character, who struggles to understand the world
she lives in and to find her place in it.  Along the way, the show explores the
motivations and struggles of the other characters, and raises philosophical
questions about discrimination, happiness, and social contentment. 

## <i>The iDOLM@STER Cinderella Girls</i>

An adaptation of its namesake.  I actually went and finished watching the
<i>The iDOLM@STER</i> anime, which I liked, however <i>Cinderella Girls</i> I
do not like so much.  The execution and pacing of the former was spot on,
developing each of the idols individually and interspersed with a few short
plot arcs, following the overall plot of the group of idols advancing in their
careers.  However, <i>Cinderella Girls</i>'s pacing is too slow, focusing
overly much on only a few of the girls, whose characters are shallower than
those in the first series.  This is probably a consequence of the <i>Cinderella
Girls</i> game having hundreds of idols, such that all of them become bland
cardboard cutouts.

## <i>Shirobako</i>

An interesting look at the inside of the anime industry through the eyes of a
group of high school student aiming to make their own anime a reality.  It's
interesting if you are interested at all in anime and you should watch it
because it's interesting.  Here's a [glossary of terms][glossary] that may come
in handy, courtesy of the fine folks at Altair & Vega.

[glossary]: http://altairandvega.net/2015/01/07/shirobako_glossary/

## <i>Durarara!!x2 Shou</i>

A continuation of the first season.  Feels like more <i>Durarara!!</i>, which
feels like <i>Baccano</i>, if you have watched one but not the other for some
reason.

## <i>Rollingâ˜†Girls</i>

I'm not sure what this show is, but it's pretty fun to watch.  True to its
name, it seems to focus on a group of girls who roll around on their
motorcycles from place to place helping people.  The show also has a strong
focus on music, and I believe the titles of each episode are references to
songs.

## <i>Koufuku Graffiti</i>

A work by SHAFT that does the term "food porn" justice.  It can be generously
described as a lighthearted story held together with food.  Genre-wise, it's
not quite a slice-of-life as there's a clear progression of time and feels
similar to <i>Sasami-san@Ganbaranai</i> (in other words, it feels like SHAFT).

As they say, food is happiness, especially when shared with others.  A comfy
show.

## <i>Dog Days''</i>

The third season of the anime original <i>Dog Days</i> series.  It can be
fairly accurately described as pure unadulterated lighthearted fun.  If "comfy"
were a real word (it is), and it were possible for an anime to be literally
physically comfy to watch, then <i>Dog Days</i> would be literally physically
comfy to watch, accompanied with a big blanket and a mug of hot chocolate.

## <i>Junketsu no Maria</i>

Literally, <i>The Virgin Mary</i>, which provides a refreshing take on the old
biblical tale, taking full advantage of artistic license.  Here, Maria is a
heathen witch who despises violence and strives to stop war, causing trouble
for everyone and even inciting the wrath of the heavens.  The struggle between
her ideals and the reality of the human heart and the human condition is
thought-provoking, and magic aside, the show is surprisingly historically
accurate (though I'm no historian).

## <i>Yoru no Yatterman</i>

The 40th anniversary tribute to <i>Yatterman</i>.  Not having watched the
original, it appears to be a children's cartoon where the villains show
up every episode with a plot and big robot, and the children show up with their
robot to save the day.

However, <i>Yoru no Yatterman</i> is a serious inversion on its predecessor.
Here, the Yatterman are the villains, ruling over a dystopia whose people live
in constant fear.  The Dorombo are now the lonely heroes, struggling against
the great Yatterman empire.  What hasn't changed, however, is the Dorombo's
inevitable defeat every episode and their stubborn persistence, but now that
persistence is no longer a source of humor but a ray of hope.

## <i>Rakuen Tsuihou</i>

This is a film that aired just before the start of this season, featuring full
CGI animation and an all-star cast.  It's a great movie, and it raises
interesting questions about a hypothetical virtual future.
