---
title: Kara no Shoujo
date: 2011-09-09
publishdate: 2011-09-09
subjects:
  - "visual novel"
contents:
  - review
---

One genre of video games that the Western community is not well
acquainted with is that of visual novels.  Very popular in Japan, visual
novels ride the border between interactive and non-interactive art,
between video games and movies or books.  Unlike most video games,
visual novels feature little action or even moving graphics, relying
mostly on still images, text, and a handful of choices the player can
make to deliver an interactive experience.  Unfortunately, these
characteristics are probably the reason for visual novels' lack of
presence in the West (though I'm quite biased on this matter, I would
say most Americans lack the ability to engage thoughtfully with text
that is a prerequisite to enjoying these particular games).

Another genre missing in the West, and which is often misunderstood, is
that of eroges, which short of erotic games.  True to their name, these
games contain sex scenes.  However, many eroges are also visual novels,
and in fact graphic depictions of sex are often much less important to
the plot, so much so that many such visual novels get family-safe
versions, with only the sex scenes cut out.

## <i>Kara no Shoujo</i>

<i>Kara no Shoujo</i>, which translates into <i>The Girl of the
Shell</i>, is an erotic visual novel made by Innocent Gray back in 2008.
It has recently been released in English, a rare gem for the English
community to enjoy.  To roughly summarize the plot, in <i>Kara no
Shoujo</i> the player follows the story of a detective, Tokisaki Reiji
in Tokyo who investigates a series of murders and a strange, seemingly
unrelated request from a girl, Kuchiki Toko, to find her true self.
Depending on the player's choices, Reiji uncovers many secrets about the
numerous characters and their relationships to almost every other
character.

## Acceptance

The game does not hesitate in its delivery, forcing the player and the
player character to face everything in its full.  The many murders are
described in gruesome detail, and if the player isn't careful—and I
wasn't the first time I played it—the protagonist will also meet a
gruesome end, even before the plot matures.  By the end, many persons
will have died, and despite the player's best efforts, at least eight
persons will die in the game's present, three of which are involved
characters which the player can court.  These are simply out of the
player's and the protagonist's power to prevent; <i>Kara no Shoujo</i>
forces Reiji to come to terms with his wife's death in the past and his
students' deaths in the present and his powerlessness to save them, and
forces the player to think about any tragedies he or she may regret
being unable to prevent.

## Truth

Like most visual novels, <i>Kara no Shoujo</i> has multiple endings.
Though it may sound tedious to play through a mostly non-interactive
game, making different choices to see different endings, it is necessary
if the player want to know all the secrets the game's characters have.
A good half or so of the characters are related to each other in a
meaningful way, and the player won't be able to explore the secrets
every character is hiding in one playthrough.  Nor will the player be
able to piece together exactly how, when, and why everything happened,
either.  Furthermore, there is no perfect path of progression; each
forces the player to make sacrifices.  The player will have to decide
what is really important, and that may not be what the game tells him or
her is important: in only one ending in the game does the female lead
and main love interest, Toko, survive, with all her limbs missing (she
is kidnapped in others and not found, though it is very likely she dies
in those endings), and that is not the ending the game considers the
True End.  In the True End, the player uncovers the secrets—all of the
secrets—behind Toko's past, along the way uncovering secrets about his
own past and the pasts of a few others as well.

## Freedom

Why is bringing these secrets to light more important than saving Toko's
life?  <i>Kara no Shoujo</i> tells the player the answer all throughout
the game; even the title and the titular work of art is subtly
whispering the answer: <i>Kara no Shoujo</i>, the Girl of the Shell, a
painting of a girl who bears an uncanny resemblance to Kuchiki Toko,
trapped in a cracked eggshell; the serial murderers, all mentally
unstable, fixated on women in their lives and the tragic events that
involved them; the protagonist, the player character, trapped by his
past and his wife's death; Kuchiki Toko, burdened with her unusual and
dangerous combination of diseases and the uneasiness surrounding her
family and her past.  All of these scream of the torments of
self-imprisonment and the desire for an uncertain freedom.  If the
player chooses well, he will talk to many of the characters one final
time, after the conclusion of everything, and he will be offered a
chance to look at the painting Toko leaves behind, the painting she had
been working on, slowly, gradually, through the progression of the
story, and which she completed with the help of the player character.
Uncovering the painting, he encounters a simple, yet inexplicably
moving, image of a little blue bird, fluttering upwards, free from its
white eggshell.
