---
title: Kodomo no Jikan
date: 2011-08-04
publishdate: 2011-08-04
subjects:
  - "anime"
contents:
  - review
---

This one's definitely different from all the other anime/manga out
there.  When talking about <i>Kodomo no Jikan</i>, the most important
thing to get out of the way is to mention that it contains copious
amounts of loli fanservice, i.e. little girls engaging in suggestive
behavior.  This alone dissuades many from watching it, as it did for me
initially.  However, <i>Kodomo no Jikan</i>'s meaningful
characterizations, character development, and social criticism sets it
apart from the vast majority of anime, and the inappropriate behavior of
the girls is vital to the questions the anime raises.

Take, for example, one of the first encounters between Kokonoe Rin, an
elementary school girl, and her teacher, Daisuke Aoki, and the audience.
Aoki discovers that Rin harassed and threatened the previous teacher to
the point of illness.  Rin accuses the previous teacher of doing the
same to her friend, at which point Aoki tells Rin he must inform her
parents of this.  In response, Rin pulls down her panties and blackmails
Aoki: "What do you think will happen if I screamed, 'Help' right now?"

In this single scene, the author strongly characterizes Rin and hints at
a point of social criticism that he reinforces later on.  The reader and
Aoki first meet Rin as a cheerful and playful, though somewhat naughty
girl, but very quickly, this scene juxtaposes this image with that of a
child who is no longer a child.  Her cruelty toward her previous
teacher, her exposing herself, and her awareness of how society would
interpret the scene all present an image of a girl all too aware of
reality, no matter how society may want to imagine girls: as pure and
innocent.  Neither is her reaction childish: she doesn't blackmail Aoki
because she's afraid of getting into trouble, but rather, as is revealed
later, to keep Aoki from knowing that her parents are divorced and her
mother dead.  Rin wants Aoki's love rather than his pity.

As much as I would like to analyze <i>Kodomo no Jikan</i> in full, I
simply don't have the time to piece together the countless meaningful,
interconnected shards scattered throughout, and I did not take notes
either, which is vital to writing analyses.  Regardless, I can assure
you that <i>Kodomo no Jikan</i> is a worthy read/watch.  Pay attention
to how each character is presented, especially Rin and Aoki, how their
character and relationship changes throughout, and periodically ask
yourself, "What is this saying about society?"  I guarantee that you
will find more than you expected.
