---
title: Summer 2012 Quick Impressions
date: 2012-08-08
publishdate: 2012-08-08
subjects:
  - "anime"
contents:
  - review
---

Arcana Famiglia is a nice Italian- and Tarot-themed shounen piece.  It's
slow so far in the beginning, setting up the atmosphere, characters,
and, well, the setting, but the action seems to be kicking in, so
further judgement will come later.

Binbougami ga~ is a nice old-style comedy, with crazy humor and abundant
refereces and shout outs.  There's some surprising depth to both main
characters, but nothing awestriking.

Campione is an interesting piece, one of the first of this season's many
fantasy series.  The setup: a guy kills a god and becomes god.  The
series self-proclaims to follow his adventures and the girls around him.
It's nice for a series to be so honest about its premise, but there's
surprisingly little fanservice, instead focusing on the main character's
relationship with the girls.  It also throws in a lot of good mythology
as per a recent rise in "documentary learning" type anime.

Chouyaku Hyakuninisshu: Uta Koi is very good.  It's premise lies on
telling the stories behind the (love) poems in the eponymous collection.
Hyakuninisshu literally means "a hundred people, one piece", meaning one
poem each from one hundred famed poets.  The anime introduces one poem
every episode, painting colorful and entertaining scenes between the
characters, as well as giving some historical information besides
(another "documentary learning" title).

Dakara Boku wa H ga Dekinai is the second fantasy work, its premise
being "horny guy fuels the powers of beautiful otherworldly girl with
his lust".  Fanservice wielded in both hands, this anime seems like your
standard fanservice+fantasy fare.

It's a bit early to judge Dog Days' (the second season) just yet.  I in
fact finished the first season to prepare for this.  Speaking generally
(about the first and possibly applicable to the second), the series is
very bright, happy, and action-packed, with fun characters and a touch
of fanservice, bound together with a decent and cohesive, but not
outstanding, plot.

No word on Ebiten yet, though it doesn't seem very deep, as a generic
slice-of-life series.

A couple of things bug me about Hagure Yuusha no Estetica, mainly some
petty fanservice surrounding the female lead and her ridiculously sized
breasts.  However, I really liked the male lead: head-strong,
intelligent and strong, self-sacrificing.  It's been quite a while since
I've seen an anime with such an explicitly badass character.  The plot
seems to be winding up nicely.  How it continues I don't know, but I'm
interested to see.

Jinrui wa Suitai Shimashita.  There's a lot of parts that I like about
this series, but a few of the main points are the pastel-colored
dystopian setting (indeed, you read that correctly) and the unnamed main
character's deadpan snarky commentary, similar to Kyon's.  With
interesting character, an interesting plot, and the generally fun
setting, everyone should try watching a few episodes of this.

Joshiraku is a slice-of-life about rakugo-performing high school girls.
As it describes itself, it provides a setting to allow viewers to enjoy
the girls' cuteness unhindered.

At first I thought Koi to Senkyo to Cholocate would end up as your
standard visual novel high school harem series, but it quite pleasantly
exceeds my expectations.  As its titles states, in addition to love
(indeed, the main character meets and builds relationships with cute
girls), elections (namely, the school president election) plays a large
role in the plot (at least so far).  The "Chocolate" part is still
pending, although the girl who seems to be the female lead seems to have
had a bad experience involving it.

Along the same lines, I expected Kokoro Connect to be standard
K-On!/Yuru Yuri fare, but its somewhat unique cast coupled with original
plot makes for an interesting watch.

I first read that Natsuyuki Rendezvous was about a love triangle between
a guy, a flower shop lady, and the lady's husband's ghost.  That is
indeed what the series is about, but it's much better than it sounds.
Letting go, hanging on, and love are the themes of the day, and
Natsuyuki doesn't lose focus.

Oda Nobuna falls squarely into the "alternate historical rendition with
cute girls replacing important personages" category (think Koihime).
There's nothing particularly unique, but the story is interesting, and
the series continues the "documentary learning" trend with (I assume)
accurate historical fact and characters (barring some anime-ification),
with a short historical introduction of each character's real life
counterpart when they first enter.

Sword Art Online is based on a novel by the same author as Accel World,
and you can easily tell by their shared VR theme.  Whilst Accel World
has its wimpy, angsty male lead, SAO has its veritably badass, and
occasionally angsty male lead.  However, the underlying motivations and
setting is a little different.  Accel World goes for a serious game
that's still just a game, an exclusive world that people join, but SAO
takes it to an extreme, making the game reality (in the titular VR game,
you can't logout and you die if you die), locking in the world.  Both
series are very good, or more to the point, SAO is very good.  The plot
feels a little rushed, as the anime has no qualms about cutting out
large chunks of time and leaving the viewer to see the important bits.
I personally like the dense story, without the filler (even necessary
filler that helps viewer identify and sympathize with characters
sometimes drags too long), but some viewers may be left in the dust.

Tari Tari is a show about music.  Actual music, that is, not like K-on!
The characters get together and do music, whilst another who has
abandoned music helps out (possibly relearning how to love music later
on).  Animation is sloppy at times, but the story is very good.
Overall, Tari Tari feels very much like Natsuiro Kiseki from last
season, down to the whole sketchy animation/surprisingly good story
skit.

Yuru Yuri ♪♪ is just more of the same: slice-of-life, implied yuri,
mindless goodness, if that's your thing.
