---
subjects:
  - "anime"
contents:
  - "transcription"
title: Ready Go - Ookami-san to Shichinin no Nakamatachi OP
date: 2010-09-06
publishdate: 2010-09-06
---

<dl>
  <dt>Title</dt>
  <dd>Ready Go!</dd>

  <dt>Artist</dt>
  <dd>May'n</dd>

  <dt>Series info</dt>
  <dd>オオカミさんと七人の仲間たち OP</dd>
  <dd>Ookami-san to Shichinin no Nakamatachi OP</dd>

  <dt>Notes</dt>
  <dd>Melody only</dd>

  <dt>Files</dt>
  <dd><a href="/files/sheetmusic/Ready-Go.pdf">Sheet music</a></dd>
</dl>

It's been a long time, but I haven't given up my Quest (so early!).  For
my second creation, I did a transcription of Ookami-san to Shichinin
Nakamatachi's OP, Ready Go!. This is the TV-size version, not the full.
Seeing as how it took me a couple hours to put this one together, the
full song seemed a scary prospect, and it has a solo as well that I am
not looking forward to transcribing. I have only transcribed a little
before this, so this is the first whole transcription I have done
(although it's still missing the chords...).

I transcribed this piece in two sittings, using blank sheet paper, later
transferring it to Lilypond. Each time I did roughly 45 seconds of the
roughly minute-and-a-half long piece. I initially had difficulty pinning
down the key. I thought it was D Major and then A-flat Major before
finally nailing it at D-flat. Bars 3-4 also gave me trouble. When I
first listened to Ready Go!, I couldn't really tell what was going on
with the last few notes, but once I got it, it seemed ridiculously
obvious.

The second half of the transcription came much more easily, probably
because of the experience I gained doing the first half, and even fixed
a mistake in the first half: in bar 27, I initially had F B-flat D
B-flat, which I am at a loss as to how I decided that sounded about
right. Also, I caught the key change to E-flat pretty quickly.

Altogether, this took me a bit more than two hours to transcribe. I
really enjoyed it and felt it was a valuable learning experience. My
next creation will probably be a dish of some sort. Look forward to it!
